Progress report - October 2023 (#382)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-oct-2023/index.md

We recently added improved support for `occlusion queries` (part of project Y.F.C.) to Android to increase performance and accuracy on all devices. But occlusion query support on Turnip drivers with Adreno 725 and 730 GPUs was not working correctly, and this took us a very long time to find.
Users experienced crashes that forced them to remain on outdated [GitHub](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu-android/releases/) versions, and we needed to stall a new Play Store release until the problem was investigated and properly solved.

The issue was found, reported, and resolved by Mesa in record time in their current Adreno 700 branches, which then driver packagers like [K11MCH1](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases) use to build packages Qualcomm users can load on emulators.

For this reason we *strongly* recommend Adreno 730 and Adreno 725 users to update to the latest [Release X](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/24.0.0-R-X) driver, which not only fixes the crashes caused by occlusion queries, but also the lack of support for the Adreno 725 and some variants (yes, there are several) of the Adreno 730. 

> Not only desktop GPU vendors love to rename stuff.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It isn't only desktop GPU vendors who love to rename things.
```

> By using this driver, we were able to launch newer Android builds with the latest upstream changes, and all Qualcomm users can safely use the latest GitHub builds if they prefer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By using this driver, we were able to launch newer Android builds with the latest upstream changes, and all Qualcomm users can safely use the latest GitHub builds if they prefer.
```

> By the way, the GitHub builds are now properly signed, so you can now update from one to the next without uninstalling them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the way, the GitHub builds are now properly signed. Rejoice, as you can now update from one to the next without needing to uninstall first.
```

If you want to test experimental and potentially unsafe (but maybe faster) changes before Play Store updates, it’s now much easier.

## Future projects

> Let’s begin with what most people want to hear about, Project Nice for Android devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s begin with what most people want to hear about: Project Nice for Android devices.
```

> NCE is progressing very well, but there are still some bugs to iron out. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NCE (Native Code Execution) is progressing very well, but there are still some bugs to iron out. 
```

> Games are becoming not only playable, but also _faster_ on devices with thermal restrictions, plus loading and closing times are also much faster now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Games are becoming not only playable, but also _faster_ on devices with thermal restrictions. Additionally, the time spent loading and closing games has been significantly reduced now!
```

NCE has helped us understand issues in our CPU emulation in x86_64 too, so expect gains on both fronts.

{{< imgs
	"./smo.mp4| Recorded with a Red Magic 7S Pro (SUPER MARIO ODYSSEY)"
  >}}

> No promises on a release date, as always, but as politicians love to say: “We’re working on it.”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No promises on a release date per usual, but as politicians love to say: “We’re working on it.”
```

{{< imgs
	"./bayo2.mp4| Destroying those touch screen controls! (Bayonetta 2)"
  >}}

> Blinkhawk is *suggesting* your writer to inform you he is working on a new project seeking to make the GPU process-agnostic, allowing multiprocess emulation within the GPU. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blinkhawk is *suggesting* that your writer informs you he is working on a new project seeking to make the GPU process-agnostic, allowing multiprocess emulation within the GPU. 
```

> We’ve been calling this simply “Multiprocess” internally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No fancy names this time, we’ve simply been calling this “Multiprocess” internally.
```

+++
date = "2023-11-13T12:00:00-03:00"
title = "Progress Report October 2023"
author = "GoldenX86"
forum = 0
+++

Hello yuz-ers! This past month we got a plethora of GPU fixes, support for new applets, a lot of work poured into the Android builds, some interesting stuff for the future, and more. Let’s get to it!

<!--more--> 

## Wowie Zowie!

New Mario game! And it’s an excellent one at that.
`Super Mario Bros. Wonder` joins the fray of 2D gameplay Mario games, and refines its gameplay to its new and *wonderful* levels.

{{< imgs
	"./wonder1.png| Such a pretty game (Super Mario Bros. Wonder)"
  >}}

> The game didn’t boot at release due to incorrect free memory reporting in the kernel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The game didn’t boot at release due to incorrect used memory reporting in the kernel.
```

  >}}

Continuing with this streak, Maide {{< gh-hovercard "11688" "implemented" >}} the `X8_D24` depth format, allowing `A Sound Plan` to start rendering.
However, more work is needed to make this game properly playable.

Sudden Explanation Time!

Robustness is a feature Vulkan provides that lets developers handle invalid memory accesses in a cleanly defined way.
This can help prevent the application from crashing or ~~summoning dragons~~ invoking undefined behaviour when some part of the code tries to access memory out of bounds.

For some reason, either Maxwell and Pascal NVIDIA GPUs have broken robustness support on uniform buffers, or yuzu’s codebase makes a wrong assumption somewhere (most likely the latter). As a result, those two NVIDIA GPU generations (GTX 750/GTX 900/GTX 1000 series) suffer from oversized graphics on `Crash Team Racing: Nitro Fueled`, due to the game accessing memory out of bounds in the shader.
{{< gh-hovercard "11789" "Manually clamping out-of-bounds buffer reads to 0" >}} on the affected GPU architectures solves the issues. We are also now investigating what causes this problem in the first place.

> Maide gets to play detective yet again, dear Watson.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't have any sherlock vibes

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
	"This GTX 1050 needed a diet (Crash Team Racing: Nitro Fueled)"
	"./ctrbug.png"
	"./ctrfix.png"
>}}

> Maide also fixed a silent issue hidden in the shadows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Maide also fixed a hidden issue with the resolution scaler.
```

First, he found that the `shfl_in_bounds` variable, which is used to track data used in compute shaders, could result in undefined behaviour when threads were inactive and return invalid results. 
{{< gh-hovercard "11847" "The solution" >}} was to move the `shfl_in_bounds` check after the `readInvocationARB` function, which requires all threads to be active, to avoid ~~dragons~~ undefined behaviour. 
This fixed some graphical corruption issues in unit tests, which should lead to fixes in real games too.

Next, a simple gift from epicboy: {{< gh-hovercard "11904" "force enabling" >}} `Threaded optimization`, an NVIDIA-specific OpenGL optimization that enables the use of a new separate CPU thread for graphics rendering.
This is a solid performance boost for those running OpenGL with NVIDIA hardware.
And for those asking, yes, Vulkan allows the use of a separate thread for rendering too–but we do it on an API level, instead of with a driver setting, so all GPUs can benefit.

Maide found a problem occurring with compute shaders when they were triggering invalidations in the buffer cache.
yuzu has a lot of code to track the sizes of buffers used by the games.

> Consider a game using two buffers: the first, with an address range from 1 to 3, and another with a range of 3 to 5. There don't overlap, so there is no issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider a game using two buffers: the first, with an address range from 1 to 2, and another with a range of 3 to 5. They don't overlap, so there is no issue.
```

To improve quality of life of people playing with multiple controllers, [flodavid](https://github.com/flodavid) changed the behaviour of how users interact with the {{< gh-hovercard "11779" "number of connected controllers" >}} in the controls settings.
Users can now more intuitively click the green lights at the bottom to select which many players/controllers they would like to be active.
Thank you!

{{< imgs
	"./controls.png| Epic Smash sleepover!"
  >}}

Another welcome UX addition is by [Macj0rdan](https://github.com/Macj0rdan), who implemented {{< gh-hovercard "11903" "a quick control for game volume" >}} with the mouse wheel when the pointer is placed over the volume button in the UI, removing the need to click it and drag a small slider.
Thank you!

Continuing his work on applets support, german77 implemented the `SaveScreenShotEx0` {{< gh-hovercard "11812" "service method and its variants," >}} allowing users to take captures from within the games themselves instead of globally with the screenshot hotkey.
This works for games like `Super Smash Bros. Ultimate`―however, note that screenshot editing is not available yet.

> Homework for tomorrow!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Homework for later!
```

This is a broad project with many “black box” areas, there will be bugs, tens of thousands of bugs, so it really helps to have reports on the official channels instead of just getting them lost online.

With that out of the way, by {{< gh-hovercard "11822" "creating random Miis" >}} with names, german77 solved the issue.

german77 also {{< gh-hovercard "11846" "expanded the character limit of cheats" >}} to more than 64 characters.
Now you can cheat to your heart's content.

You know our developers spend a lot of time opening and closing yuzu when byte[] can accurately measure that 10% of shutdown crashes are caused by the game list.
He found the issue was in how Qt deals with messages from objects that were destroyed or disconnected (like stopping the emulator while the game list is loading).
By {{< gh-hovercard "11846" "changing the behaviour" >}} of how the game list is reported to those events, another source of shutdown crashes has been defeated.

## Kernel, CPU, and file system changes

byte[] has been having a lot of “fun” lately fixing and implementing kernel changes.

> First off, he {{< gh-hovercard "11686" "fully implemented transfer memory," >}} fixed {{< gh-hovercard "11766" "incorrect page group tracking," >}} added the full {{< gh-hovercard "11914" "implementation of KPageTableBase," >}} and even {{< gh-hovercard "11843" "added" >}} nearly the entire KProcess implementation itself!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First off, he {{< gh-hovercard "11686" "fully implemented transfer memory," >}} fixed {{< gh-hovercard "11766" "incorrect page group tracking," >}} {{< gh-hovercard "11914" "updated the implementation" >}} of KPageTableBase, and has now {{< gh-hovercard "11843" "nearly completed" >}} the entire KProcess implementation!
```

As preliminary work for NCE support coming in the near future, byte[] implemented {{< gh-hovercard "11718" "native clock support" >}} for arm64 devices running on Linux or Android.
There is no support for ARM Windows devices for now, as none have bothered to include a Vulkan driver yet.

> The kernel was updated to {{< gh-hovercard "11748" "firmware version 17.0.0," >}} ensuring support for future games.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The kernel was updated to reflect changes made in {{< gh-hovercard "11748" "firmware version 17.0.0," >}} ensuring support for future games.
```

Not only desktop GPU vendors love to rename stuff.

By using this driver, we were able to launch newer Android builds with the latest upstream changes, and all Qualcomm users can safely use the latest GitHub builds if they prefer

By the way, the GitHub builds are now properly signed, so you can now update from one to the next without uninstalling them.
If you want to test experimental and potentially unsafe (but maybe faster) changes before Play Store updates, it’s now much easier.

## Future projects

Let’s begin with what most people want to hear about, Project Nice for Android devices.
NCE is progressing very well, but there are still some bugs to iron out. 
Games are becoming not only playable, but also _faster_ on devices with thermal restrictions, plus loading and closing times are also much faster now.
NCE has helped us understand issues in our CPU emulation in x86_64 too, so expect gains on both fronts.

{{< imgs
	"./smo.mp4| Recorded with a Red Magic 7S Pro (SUPER MARIO ODYSSEY)"
  >}}

No promises on a release date, as always, but as politicians love to say: “We’re working on it.”

{{< imgs
	"./bayo2.mp4| Destroying those touch screen controls! (Bayonetta 2)"
  >}}

> Blinkhawk is *suggesting* your writer to inform you he is working on a new project seeking to make the GPU process-agnostic, allowing multiprocess emulation within the GPU. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Blinkhawk is suggesting that your writer inform you he is working on a new project seeking to make the GPU process-agnostic, allowing multiprocess emulation within the GPU. 
```

Author: This sounds broken

For this particular depth format on Vulkan, it can {{< gh-hovercard "11677" "now be converted" >}} to `A8B8G8R8_UNORM` when the game needs this behaviour.
Additionally, {{< gh-hovercard "11716" "adding support for" >}} the `Z32`, `FLOAT`, `UINT`, `UINT`, `UINT`, `LINEAR` variants in the internal look-up table helps complete the deal.
This work solves rendering issues in games like `Disney Speedstorm` and `Titan Glory`.

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
	"Look, the most powerful mouse in the world (Disney Speedstorm)"
	"./disneybug.png"
	"./disneyfix.png"
>}}

Some games also make aliases of images in the D32 depth format.
Since a similar, but flipped, limitation with format conversion was present here too, `ARGB8_SRGB` and `BGRA8_UNORM/BGRA8_SRGB` {{< gh-hovercard "11795" "can now be converted to" >}} D32_FLOAT to provide proper compatibility.

{{< imgs
	"./gothic.png| Aged graphics have this feel of nostalgia (Gothic)"
  >}}

Continuing with this streak, Maide {{< gh-hovercard "11688" "implemented" >}} the `X8_D24` depth format, allowing `A Sound Plan` to start rendering.
However, more work is needed to make this game properly playable.

Sudden Explanation Time!

> 

Reviewer 2: Not resolved, this doesn't belong here

  >}}

And now, one for the Linux gang.
[v1993](https://github.com/v1993) tested and {{< gh-hovercard "11786" "re-enabled CUDA video decoding" >}} on Linux, allowing better video decoding performance for NVIDIA users (running the proprietary driver, of course).
We previously disabled CUDA by default because it can fail on systems running both a dedicated NVIDIA GPU and a dedicated AMD GPU (iGPUs are fine), a decently rare configuration that only a few people, like your writer, actually ever use.

For those few users running mixed hardware vendors on your systems, please manually  select “CPU Video Decoding” if you’re affected by video decoding issues now. 
This was the previous default behaviour.

We got user reports of crashes happening when grabbing a Grand Star in `Super Mario Galaxy`, as part of `Super Mario 3D All-Stars`.
byte[] found that the problem is in how the Vulkan scheduler incorrectly flushes data.
The solution? [Use a lock](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SNgNBsCI4EA). 
And if that doesn’t work, {{< gh-hovercard "11806" "use more locks." >}}
Happy Star hunting!

To improve OpenGL support even further beyond, [Epicboy](https://github.com/ameerj) returns.

> First, he found that the `shfl_in_bounds` function, which is used to perform a warp-level parallel reduction in compute, could cause some threads to be inactive and return invalid results. 
> {{< gh-hovercard "11847" "The solution" >}} was to move the `shfl_in_bounds` check after the `readInvocationARB` function, which requires all threads to be active, to avoid ~~dragons~~ undefined behaviour. 
> This fixed some graphical corruption issues in unit tests, which should lead to fixes in real games too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, he found that the `shfl_in_bounds` variable, which is used to track data used in compute shaders, could result in undefined behaviour when threads were inactive and return invalid results. 
{{< gh-hovercard "11847" "The solution" >}} was to move the `shfl_in_bounds` check after the `readInvocationARB` function, which requires all threads to be active, to avoid ~~dragons~~ undefined behaviour. 
This fixed some graphical corruption issues in unit tests, which should lead to fixes in real games too.
```

> Next, a simple gift from epicboy: {{< gh-hovercard "11904" "force enabling" >}} `Threaded optimization`, an NVIDIA specific OpenGL optimization that enables the use of a new separate CPU thread for graphics rendering.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, a simple gift from epicboy: {{< gh-hovercard "11904" "force enabling" >}} `Threaded optimization`, an NVIDIA-specific OpenGL optimization that enables the use of a new separate CPU thread for graphics rendering.
```

This is a solid performance boost for those running OpenGL with NVIDIA hardware.

> And for those asking, yes, Vulkan assigns a separate thread for rendering too–it can be done on an API level, instead of with a driver-level setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And for those asking, yes, Vulkan allows the use of a separate thread for rendering too–but we do it on an API level, instead of with a driver setting, so all GPUs can benefit.
```

> Maide found a problem in our compute shaders, which caused invalidations in the buffer cache.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Maide found a problem occurring with compute shaders when they were triggering invalidations in the buffer cache.
```

yuzu has a lot of code to track the sizes of buffers used by the games.

> You can get a buffer with a range going from 1 to 3 and another with a range of 3 to 5. No overlap, no issue.
> If after the game runs for a while, a third buffer shows up requiring a range of 1 to 5, the previous two buffers would be considered to overlap it, and are deleted. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider a game using two buffers: the first, with an address range from 1 to 3, and another with a range of 3 to 5. There don't overlap, so there is no issue.
Then, after the game runs for a while, a buffer requiring a range of 1 to 5 is used.
The previous two buffers would be considered to overlap it, and will be deleted. 
```

> The old information is moved to the new third buffer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, the old buffer data from the two overlaps gets moved to the new third buffer.
```

While this was already working for graphics-related buffers, it didn’t correctly consider compute buffers.

{{< gh-hovercard "11859" "Adding the missing loop" >}} to fix this behaviour, problems ranging from minimal graphical issues, to completely broken game logics, are potentially solved.
You know what they say: with compute, the sky's the limit. Just ask AI developers.

Another optimization Maide implemented affects how buffers are handled after they are successfully deleted.
The previous method would unnecessarily create several copies, wasting resources.
By {{< gh-hovercard "11683" "removing one synchronisation step," >}} only the exact amount of needed copies are used.

Here’s a solution for a long-standing issue: some 2D games were flipped on AMD, Intel, and Android GPUs.
Games can use different APIs to run on the Switch. 
Nintendo allows the use of Vulkan, OpenGL, and their proprietary API, NVN. 
This poses a problem for emulation on Vulkan, since [only NVIDIA GPUs](https://vulkan.gpuinfo.org/listdevicescoverage.php?extension=VK_NV_viewport_swizzle&platform=all) support the viewport swizzle extension (which allows for transforming viewports).

> To allow other GPU vendors to render games properly, a fallback (and slower) implementation was made, able to handle OpenGL games.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To allow other GPU vendors to render properly in most cases, a fallback implementation was made to handle the case of vertical flips, for use by OpenGL games.
```

A tiny error in its implementation made it unable to correctly track invalidations of the viewport flip state, resulting in garbled graphics in several games.
byte[] {{< gh-hovercard "11893" "solved" >}} that issue with a one-line change, making games like `Stardew Valley`, and `Streets of Rage 4`, finally render properly on non-NVIDIA hardware.
No more mirrors needed!

{{< imgs
	"./sv.png| THE cozy farming game (Stardew Valley)"
  >}}

While investigating this, a similar but different issue came to light.
Many OpenGL games (that is, games using OpenGL to render, not yuzu rendering on OpenGL) ask for a 1920x1080 framebuffer, regardless of whether the game is running in handheld or docked mode.

> The game then simply moves and resizes the region it’s rendering to inside that 1920x1080 buffer, like moving a small box inside a bigger box if you will.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The game then simply moves and resizes the region it’s rendering to inside that 1920x1080 buffer, like moving a small box inside a bigger box, if you will.
```

In the final step, the image is flipped and sent to the bottom of that 1080p render target.
yuzu was incorrectly rendering only the top of the render target due to how it used to calculate that flip in the final pass.

{{< gh-hovercard "11894" "Adjusting" >}} this behaviour made `Tiny Thor` render correctly in handheld mode.

{{< imgs
	"./tt.png| To Valhalla (Tiny Thor)"
  >}}

And to close the graphics section, by following this chain of events, the previous pull request helped spot a bug in our Vulkan presentation that led to `Arcaea` being incorrectly cropped in handheld mode.
95 lines of {{< gh-hovercard "11896" "cropping-behaviour code changes" >}} later, and byte[] solved the issue.

{{< imgs
	"./arcaea.png| Good art style (Arcaea)"
  >}}

## Android changes

> This month the Android build got not only great UI changes to improve QoL, but device compatibility was greatly improved for Adreno users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This month the Android build got not only significant UI changes to improve QoL, but device compatibility was greatly improved for Adreno users.
```

No support for ARM Windows devices, as none has bothered to include a Vulkan driver yet.

The kernel was updated to {{< gh-hovercard "11748" "firmware version 17.0.0," >}} ensuring support for future games.

v1993 {{< gh-hovercard "11772" "solved some warnings" >}} that were spamming our build logs–namely, using `std::forward` where appropriate, and qualifying `std::move` calls.
This should solve build issues for those experimenting with Darwin Build Targets.

By user request, byte[] {{< gh-hovercard "11774" "further improved the build performance of RomFS mods" >}} by getting rid of some unnecessary object copies.
This also fixed a file handle leak, which now allows modders to edit mod files after stopping emulation, helping them work faster on those *juicy and delicious* game mods.

## Audio changes

Our audio connoisseur Maide found thanks to user reports that `Ancient Rush 2` would crash at the end of the first developers screen.
{{< gh-hovercard "11735" "Clearing the DPS buffer" >}} after each call execution closes the issue.

{{< imgs
	"./ar2.png| Diggy Diggy Hole! (Ancient Rush 2)"
  >}}

> Speaking of audio, byte[] accomplished another blow to shutdown crashes by {{< gh-hovercard "11778" "fixing a shutdown deadlock" >}} in the audio renderer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Speaking of audio, byte[] delivered another resounding victory in the shutdown department by {{< gh-hovercard "11778" "fixing a deadlock" >}} in the audio renderer.
```

But for those stuck on Windows, this is the last ride.

GCN4.0, GCN5.0, you weren’t the most efficient cards, but you gave us good value on the worst moments, *years* of amazing gameplay, and good and funny FineWine moments.
We salute you and thank you for your impeccable service, few GPU architectures leave the stage with such a round of applause.

o7

### Turnip, a very quickly improving work-in-progress

yuzu uses a single codebase for all its releases, upstream/master/main, however you prefer to call it, Mainline, Early Access, and Android all start from there.
When improvements to the codebase are added, they eventually reach all releases, Android included.

What happens if we add the improved `occlusion queries` (part of project Y.F.C.) to Android to increase performance on all devices, and its implementation on Turnip drivers is not very robust?
You get crashes that force users to remain on outdated [GitHub](https://github.com/yuzu-emu/yuzu-android/releases/) versions, and forces us to stall new Play Store releases until the problem gets investigated and solved.

> The issue was found, reported, and resolved by Mesa in record time in their current Adreno 700 branches, which then driver repackers like [K11MCH1](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases) use to build packages Qualcomm users can load on emulators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The issue was found, reported, and resolved by Mesa in record time in their current Adreno 700 branches, which then driver packagers like [K11MCH1](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases) use to build packages Qualcomm users can load on emulators.
```

For this reason we *strongly* recommend Adreno 730 and Adreno 725 users to update to the latest [Release X](https://github.com/K11MCH1/AdrenoToolsDrivers/releases/tag/24.0.0-R-X) driver, which not only fixes the crashes caused by occlusion queries, but also the lack of support for the Adreno 725 and some variants (yes, there are several) of the Adreno 730. 
Not only desktop GPU vendors love to rename stuff.

By using this driver, we were able to launch newer Android builds with the latest upstream changes, and all Qualcomm users can safely use the latest GitHub builds if they prefer, which by the way are now properly signed, so you can just update from one to the next without uninstalling them.
If you want to test experimental and potentially unsafe but maybe faster changes before Play Store updates, now it’s much easier.

## Future projects

Let’s begin with what most people want to hear about, Project Nice for Android devices.

> NCE is progressing very well, there are still some bugs to iron out. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NCE is progressing very well, but there are still some bugs to iron out. 
```
